RFC 0016 instances vs types (#531)
jvalue/jayvee: rfc/0016-instances-vs-types/0016-instances-vs-types.md

  - DISCUSSION: The RFC is open for discussion. Usually, we open a PR to trigger discussions.
  - ACCEPTED: The RFC was accepted. Create issues to prepare implementation of the RFC.
  - REJECTED: The RFC was rejected. If another revision emerges, switch to status DRAFT.
-->

## Summary
Following the [Design Principles](https://jvalue.github.io/jayvee/docs/dev/design-principles), Jayvee focuses on describing a goal state instead of how to get there. When creating pipelines, programmers use the pipe syntax `->` to connect previously defined `blocks`. Implicitely, the interpreter creates unnamed singleton instances of those blocks and executes them.

This implicit creation can lead to confusion between blocks and block instances. In addition, it makes it impossible to create more than one instance of a block, which will prevent the creation of more complex DAGs.

This RFC introduces minimal syntax changes to allow the creation of block instances, introduces more code structure and clarifies wording.

## Motivation
It is impossible to create multiple instances of the same block, limiting how complex a DAG can be described.

## Explanation

> The following explanations use blocks as an example but map directly to **Constraints** and **Valuetypes**. That is, constraints and valuetypes can also only be **defined** outside of pipelines and are valuetypes are **instantiated** inside of pipelines (constraints are only instantiated as part of valuetypes).

Reviewer: I think this text snippet belongs further down after the instantiation subject

### Current state
#### M2 level (focused on blocks only)
Jayvee currently allows the instantiation of `composite blocktype`s, `builtin blocktype`s and `block`s. `block`s are connected to `blocktype`s by an `oftype` relationship.

```mermaid
classDiagram
direction BT
class BuiltInBlocktype
class CompositeBlocktype  
class Block
class Blocktype { <<abstract>> }

class OftypeRelationship

CompositeBlocktype --|> Blocktype
BuiltInBlocktype --|> Blocktype

OftypeRelationship "1"-->"1" Block: instance
OftypeRelationship "*"-->"1" Blocktype: type
```

#### An example model visualized
##### The model
```
pipeline CarsPipeline {
	CarsExtractor
	   	-> CarsTableInterpreter
		-> CarsLoader;

	block CarsCSVExtractor oftype CSVExtractor {
		url: "https://gist.githubusercontent.com/noamross/e5d3e859aa0c794be10b/raw/b999fb4425b54c63cab088c0ce2c0d6ce961a563/cars.csv";
	}

	block CarsTableInterpreter oftype TableInterpreter {
		header: true;
		columns: [
			"name" oftype text,
			"mpg" oftype decimal,
		];
	}

	block CarsLoader oftype SQLiteLoader {
		table: "Cars";
		file: "./cars.sqlite";
	}
}
```

> ##### As diagram including M2 level

Reviewer 2: I'd still strongly vote to use the conventions used in similar graphs. We use the names and semantics of `M0`, `M1`, and `M2` from the UML metamodel, so why do we decide to use the exact opposite semantic of the arrows?

 See [Metamodeling on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metamodeling) and [an example that is very similar to our case](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metamodeling#/media/File:M0-m3.png).
![Example](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/93/M0-m3.png)

anonymousBlock1 --"instance of"--> CarsCSVExtractor
anonymousBlock2 --"instance of"--> CarsTableInterpreter
anonymousBlock3 --"instance of"--> CarsLoader
```

##### As diagram excluding M2 level/instance of relationships
```mermaid
flowchart BT
subgraph M1
    direction BT
    CarsPipeline["CarsPipeline : Pipeline"]
    CSVExtractor["CSVExtractor : CompositeBlocktype"]
    TableInterpreter["TableInterpreter : BuiltInBlocktype"]
    SQLiteLoader["SQLiteLoader : BuiltInBlocktype"]
    CarsCSVExtractor["CarsCSVExtractor : Block"]
    CarsTableInterpreter["CarsTableInterpreter : Block"]
    CarsLoader["CarsTableInterpreter : Block"]
end
subgraph M0
    anonymousPipeline1[" : CarsPipeline"]
    
    anonymousBlock1[" : CarsCSVExtractor"]
    anonymousBlock2[" : CarsTableInterpreter"]
    anonymousBlock3[" : CarsLoader"]
end

CarsCSVExtractor -."oftype : OftypeRelationship".-> CSVExtractor
CarsTableInterpreter -."oftype : OftypeRelationship".-> TableInterpreter
CarsLoader -."oftype : OftypeRelationship".-> SQLiteLoader
M0 ~~~ M1
```

### Proposed changes
#### 1. Clarify naming
- Across M-levels, we have only a `instance of` relationship

> - On M1 level, only the `oftype` relationship exists between `block`s and `blocktype`s because it is modelled at M2 level

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The only other currently possible relationship is the `oftype` relationship between a `block` and a `blocktype` on M1 level. Other relationships are not possible since they are not modelled at M2 level.
```

- Instantiation of M2 level concepts in M1 is done with language keywords
    - `composite blocktype <name>` / `builtin blocktype <name>`
- We keep `block` as M1 level keyword to instantiate the M2 level `Block`
- Users can describe M0 level entities in a Jayvee model

>     - Now by creating anonymous singleton instances of `block`s

Reviewer: Would leave that out here as we specify three different ways to do so further down.

    - ` : <block>` models an anonymous instance of `<block>`, reusing the same syntax creates a new instance
    - `<block>` models a singleton instance of `<block>`, reusing the same syntax reuses the same instance

#### 3. Allow only pipes and block instances in pipelines
- Pipelines may only contain pipes and block instances, everything else has to be described outside of a pipeline

New syntax (minimal cars example):
```
// Pipeline containing block instantiations
pipeline CarsPipeline {
	myExtractor : CarsCSVExtractor 
    -> myInterpreter : CarsTableInterpreter
		-> myLoader : CarsLoader;
}

// Block definitions outside of pipeline
block CarsCSVExtractor oftype CSVExtractor {
  url: "https://gist.githubusercontent.com/noamross/e5d3e859aa0c794be10b/raw/b999fb4425b54c63cab088c0ce2c0d6ce961a563/cars.csv";
  enclosing: '"';
}
block CarsTableInterpreter oftype TableInterpreter {
  header: true;
  columns: [
    "mpg" oftype decimal,
    "cyl" oftype integer,
    "disp" oftype decimal,
  ];
}
block CarsLoader oftype SQLiteLoader {
  table: "Cars";
  file: "./cars.sqlite";
}
```

> Composite blocks are a special case that use pipeline syntax to chain blocks. For the scope of this RFC, chaining pipeline syntax should **stay possible in pipelines and composite blocks** while **composite blocks are also be able to contain block definitions**. In a future enhancement (see Possible Future Changes/Enhancements), this should be split up with the introduction of packages (ref [RFC0015](../0015-multi-file-jayvee/0015-multi-file-jayvee.md)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Composite blocks are a special case that use a smiliar pipe syntax to chain blocks. For the scope of this RFC, chaining pipeline syntax should **stay possible in pipelines and composite blocks** while **composite blocks are also able to contain block definitions**. In a future enhancement (see Possible Future Changes/Enhancements), this should be split up with the introduction of packages (ref [RFC0015](../0015-multi-file-jayvee/0015-multi-file-jayvee.md)).
```
